[docs][pytorch] Add examples for compiling with external weights. (#18658)
openxla/iree: docs/website/docs/guides/ml-frameworks/pytorch.md

        self.value = new_value
    ```

> #### :octicons-code-16: Separating parameters during compilation

Reviewer: nit: could use `octicons-file-symlink-file-16` to match the icon used for https://iree.dev/guides/parameters/ in the nav: https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/c86b621665ad8b898c0d0e987a45267f78eb9c3f/docs/website/docs/guides/parameters.md?plain=1#L2

Consistency and repetition across pages can make concepts easier to learn.

> #### :octicons-code-16: Separating parameters during compilation

Reviewer: nit: This isn't _just_ about compilation, it's also about runtime, since different parameters can be fed to the same loaded program at runtime. Could change the section header to something more like "Using external parameters"

> In practical scenarios, it is usually unfeasible to embed model parameters

Reviewer 2: nit: infeasible is more common. 

nit: instead of "In practical scenarios", maybe put "For large models", since this is the practical scenario where this applies.

Author: Ok, will do.

> In practical scenarios, it is usually unfeasible to embed model parameters
> in the IR.
> 
> `aot.externalize_module_parameters()` allows for the separation of
> the parameters from the IR, but still encodes a symbolic relationship between
> between parameters and the IR, so they can be loaded at runtime.

Reviewer: This first sentence is a bit awkward ("unfeasible") and focuses on internal implementation details ("IR" intermediate representation is mostly internal to the compiler).

Borrowing some language from https://iree.dev/guides/parameters/, I'd rephrase to focus on what benefits external parameters provide and maybe use terms like "program"/"code"/"compute graph" instead of "IR". Acronyms can also be overwhelming for users, especially when the acronyms come from different domains.

This should also link to `../parameters.md` for more information somewhere near the top.

```suggestion
Model parameters can be stored in standalone files that can be efficiently
stored and loaded separately from model compute graphs. See the
[Parameters guide](../parameters.md) for more general information about
parameters in IREE.

When using iree-turbine, the `aot.externalize_module_parameters()` function
separates parameters from program modules and encodes a symbolic relationship
between them so they can be loaded at runtime.
```

We define a `torch.nn.Module` that will be compiled, and save

> random tensors to be loaded as parameters in a safetensors file.

Reviewer: I would link either https://huggingface.co/docs/safetensors/ or https://github.com/huggingface/safetensors here when introducing "safetensors" for context.

Like this: `[safetensors](https://huggingface.co/docs/safetensors/)`

> ```python

Reviewer: To keep the overall page organized, I would either put this entire example into a single code block:
```python
# Define a torch.nn.Module with some parameters.
import torch
class LinearModule(torch.nn.Module):
    ...

# Save the parameters to a .safetensors file.
...
save_file(params, "params.safetensors")

# Externalize the model parameters.
aot.externalize_module_parameters(linear_module)
...
```

or break out each step into an ordered or unordered list:

````
1. We define a `torch.nn.Module` that will be compiled, and save
random tensors to be loaded as parameters in a safetensors file.

    ```python
    import torch
    ...
````

Here's how the page would look with a list:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ca70bbb2-80d5-419a-a75f-06f0179f53a2)

import torch
class LinearModule(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, in_features, out_features):
        super().__init__()
        self.weight = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.randn(in_features, out_features))
        self.bias = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.randn(out_features))

    def forward(self, input):
        return (input @ self.weight) + self.bias

> # Construct LinearModule.
> linear_module = LinearModule(4,3)

Reviewer: Drop obvious comment to keep the code sample smaller

```suggestion
linear_module = LinearModule(4,3)
```

```

Safetensors can be created directly from a parameters dictionary created from
randomly generated torch tensors.

```python
# Create a params dictionary. Note that the keys here match
# LinearModule's attributes. We will use the saved safetensor

> # file for use from the command line.

Reviewer: You can wrap these lines at closer to 80 characters if you want. Still quite a bit of unused whitespace:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f40ab2cf-c776-47a1-9175-abb17a73a458)

from safetensors.torch import save_file

wt = torch.randn(4,3)
bias = torch.randn(3)
params = { "weight": wt, "bias": bias }
save_file(params, "params.safetensors")

> ```

Reviewer 2: I'm finding this section misleading from the example above. The `linear_module` already has specific weight and bias parameters. Why are we storing new random ones?

Author: Just as an example! We might not always have the class that actually represents the model, but just some representation of the graph. This is a demonstration of how, in such a case, one can load the weights separately.

Author: @zjgarvey I changed the examples to use the modules parameters.

Exporting through `aot.export()` and compiling the produced output generates a binary.

```python
import numpy as np
import shark_turbine.aot as aot

# Externalize the model parameters. This removes weight
# tensors from the IR module, allowing them to be loaded
# at runtime. Symbolic references to these parameters are
# still retained in the IR.

> aot.externalize_module_parameters(linear_module)

Reviewer 2: Where does this externalize the weights to? Does the file have to be called `params.safetensors` in the PWD or something?

Reviewer 2: Reading further on, it looks like you specify the params file when invoking iree-run-module. I suppose the symbolic reference is to the name of the parameter in the safetensors dictionary you saved earlier?

Author: No! It can be any path you specify. Here it is this file in PWD.

Author: > Reading further on, it looks like you specify the params file when invoking iree-run-module. I suppose the symbolic reference is to the name of the parameter in the safetensors dictionary you saved earlier?

Yes, and under the scope named "model".

ext_arg = torch.randn(4)

> exported_module = aot.export(linear_module, ext_arg)

Reviewer 2: What is ext_arg? Is this an example input?

> exported_module = aot.export(linear_module, ext_arg)

Reviewer: What's this `ext_arg`? In sample code you can be more verbose if it makes it easier to follow.

# Compile the exported module, to generate the binary.
binary = exported_module.compile(save_to=None)

# Save the input as an npy tensor, for later reuse.
ext_arg_2 = ext_arg.numpy()

> np.save("input.npy", ext_arg_2)

Reviewer 2: Ah, `ext_arg` is an input! I'd put a comment before you define `ext_arg` above.

Reviewer 2: maybe rename ext_arg entirely?

Author: Ok, will do.

    instance, idx.create_provider(scope="model"),
)

# Load the runtime. There are essentially two modules to load,
# one for the weights, and one for the main module.
# Ensure that the VMFB file is not already open or deleted before use.
vm_modules = ireert.load_vm_modules(
    param_module,
    ireert.create_hal_module(instance, config.device),
    ireert.VmModule.copy_buffer(instance, binary.map_memory()),
    config=config,
)

# vm_modules is a list of modules. The last module in the list is the one
# generated from the binary, so we use that to generate an output.
result = vm_modules[-1].main(ext_arg)
print(result.to_host())
```

It is possible to save the VMFB binary to disk, then run `iree-run-module` through
the command line to generate outputs.

```python
# When save_to is not None, the binary is saved to the given path,
# and a None value is returned.
binary = exported_module.compile(save_to="compiled_module.vmfb")
```

The stored safetensors file, the input tensor, and the VMFB can now be passed
in to IREE through the command line.

```bash
iree-run-module --module=compiled_module.vmfb --parameters=model=params.safetensors \
                --input=@input.npy

> ```

Reviewer: The sample code you have here takes a branch, so you might want to consider using content tabs: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/content-tabs/

* Compiler (always Python, since this is PyTorch)
* Runtime
  * Python API
  * C API
  * Native tools

Steps for each runtime choice would go in a separate tab:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e83b4f32-e43d-469e-8e6b-5b441a3ab156)

Note here that the `--parameters` flag has `model=` following it immediately.
This simply specifies the scope of the parameters, and is reflected in the

> compiled IR.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand this. In what situations are parameters *not* model wide?

Author: model is a _scope_ here. It could actually be anything. If is even possible that the biases could be under a scope called "b", and weights under a scope called "a". In that case, they would be in different indices, and `model=` would be then `b=` and `a=` respectively.
